# TeleMetrum Flights

This page contains Bdale's notes about each flight of [TeleMetrum](..) 
to date.

## 2009.04.19 ##

Flew sn 1 in Vertical Assault on J335 at Tripoli Colorado launch site near
Hartsel, Colorado.  Good flight data collected through apogee.  Data record
ends apparently coincident with firing of apogee charge by adjacent MAWD.
One mounting screw found missing later (the one that goes between the screw
terminals and the LiPo battery connector), so it's entirely possible the power
was short-circuited briefly when the screw worked loose.

[Raw flight data](flights/sn1-flight1.txt), 
[processed data](flights/sn1-flight1.parsed),
[plot](flights/sn1-flight1.plot.ps).

## 2009.05.16 ##

SCORE launch at Hudson Ranch, two flights of sn 4 in Robert's Lil Nuke.  In
neither case did we turn on the HT, all RF reception was via TeleDongle.

First flight used an Aerotech G54W-M.  Telemetry logged using TeleDongle sn 5
and aoview on the pad and throughout the flight, then flight log dumped 
after recovery.  Rocket was beeping out 390 when recovered after flight, and
we continued to get telemetry even after rocket was on the ground.

[Raw flight data](flights/sn4-flight1.txt) 

Second flight used an Aerotech G79W-L, with the delay chosen to intentionally
put ejection well past apogee.  Telemetry logged using TeleDongle sn 5 and 
aoview on the pad and throughout the flight, then flight log dumped after 
recovery.  No beeping when recovered, and last telemetry frame captured was 
at 15m AGL just before touch-down.

[Raw flight data](flights/sn4-flight2.txt)
