# TeleMetrum Units

This page contains Bdale's notes about each unit of [TeleMetrum](..) 
assembled to date.

## sn 1 ##

Full load of v0.1 PCB, two cuts and jumps to rewire P1_2 to be SPI memory 
chip select, R14 and R15 loaded with 56k, 10k tacked from each to 
ground.  R17 replaced with short circuit, R18 removed.

Installed in Bdale's Vertical Assault.  First unit to be flown on 
19 April 2009, on a Cesaroni J335.

Moved to Horizon rebuild.

## sn 2 ##

Full load of v0.1 PCB, two cuts and jumps to rewire P1_2 to be SPI memory 
chip select, R14 and R15 loaded with 56k, 10k tacked from each to 
ground.

Delivered to Keith Packard for firmware development and use.  Flown twice
on 10 May 2008 in Keith's Grappler to about 45m on Estes D12-3 motors.

Flew in Keith's Little Dog Dual Deploy at Mile High Mayhem as a payload.  The
ascent was pretty but the rocket failed to deploy and lawn-darted.  The battery
and screw terminal block connectors got more or less torn off, but the rest
of the board survived and good data was recovered from the flight.

In Bdale's possession for repair.

## sn 3 ##

Full load of v0.1 PCB on 2009.04.22, two cuts and jumps to rewire P1_2 
to be SPI memory chip select, R14 and R15 loaded with 100k, 27k tacked 
from each to ground.

Installed in Bdale's Vertical Assault after sn 1 moved to Horizon, but never
flown there.

Pulled and given to Keith to take home from Mayhem.

## sn 4 ##

Full load of v0.1 PCB on 2009.04.22, two cuts and jumps to rewire P1_2 
to be SPI memory chip select, R14 and R15 loaded with 100k, 27k tacked 
from each to ground.

Installed in Robert's Lil Nuke.

## sn 5 ##

Partial "ground" load of v0.1 PCB on 2009.04.23 plus beeper and serial 
connector for use as TeleDongle or for TeleTerra prototype.

## sn 6 ##

Partial "ground" load of v0.1 PCB on 2009.04.23 for use as TeleDongle.

Delivered to Keith Packard for firmware development and use.
