# Amateur Radio and Rockets

## Why Radio? ##

There are at least two strong motivations for putting radios in rockets.  The
first is to help locate the rocket after flight, either by using radio 
direction finding techniques, or by having the rocket report its position as
determined by on-board GPS over a radio link.  The second is to record data
about the flight for later analysis in case the rocket itself isn't recovered.

One of the main features of [TeleMetrum](../TeleMetrum/) is the fully
integrated radio link.  The chip at the heart of our designs includes a highly
optimized digital radio transceiver at very low power.

## Legal Context ##

It is not clear to us that all of the approaches people have taken over
the years to put off the shelf radios in rockets are actually legal.  
To legally operate a radio transmitter, we need to understand and adhere 
to the rules that regulate use of the radio frequency spectrum.  But when 
commercial radio components are used in ways the original designer did not 
envision, the rules against which they were designed and certified may not 
still apply.  But because rocket flights are short and often happen in 
remote places, and the chance of harmful interference to other radio users is
therefore pretty small, we're never heard of anyone being fined or 
prosecuted over this.

In the United States, the rules that matter to us are published by the 
Federal Communications Commission, or [FCC](http://fcc.gov/).  Under Part 15 
of the FCC rules, it is possible to design and build radios that can be used 
without each user needing to hold an FCC license.  However, complying with 
those regulations isn't trivial and isn't cheap.

But all hope is not lost!  There's an alternative, unambiguously legal 
approach to operating our radio links.  FCC Part 97 and its equivalent in 
other countries define an "amateur radio" (sometimes called "ham radio") 
service.  Holders of amateur radio licenses can transmit on many different 
frequency bands in many different operating modes, using equipment that does 
not have to be specifically certified.  This includes permission to operate
telemetry links and remote controls such as what we want for our rockets!

## Getting an Amateur Radio License ##

To legally operate a TeleMetrum system as designed in the USA, you need at
least a "Technician Class" amateur radio license.  This is the entry level
license, and getting one is actually pretty easy.  If you've been through
the written teste for a Level 2 high power rocketry certification, taking a ham
radio license exam is a similar kind of experience.  The test is multiple
choice with questions taken from a pool that is completely published ahead
of time, and there are some great online resources for learning the material
and taking practice exams until you're ready to take the real test.
This [ARRL page](http://www.arrl.org/FandES/ead/classes.html) is a good place
to start.  

## Related Equipment ##

It's entirely possible to use just a TeleMetrum in a rocket and a TeleDongle
on the ground with simple wire whip antennas and nothing else.  But there are 
other pieces of amateur radio gear that we think are worth mentioning because 
we find them useful too.

### Transceivers ###

A popular class of commercially available ham radio transceiver is commonly
known as an "HT".  These are hand-held, cover one or more frequency bands,
and usually are meant to operate primarily using narrow-bandwidth FM voice.  
Various companies make and sell them, and they have multiple uses at a rocket
launch.  Like walkie talkies or FRS radios (but better!), they can be used to
talk to others on the flight line, coordinate search activities, and so forth.
Choosing a "dual band" or "multi band" model that covers both the "2 meter" 
and "70 centimeter" bands is a good idea, since 2m is a good band for local 
voice conversations and the audio tones put out by TeleMetrum for direction 
finding are in the 70cm band.  

Keith and Bdale both currently own and use the 
[Yaesu VX-6R](http://yaesu.com/indexVS.cfm?cmd=DisplayProducts&ProdCatID=111&encProdID=4C6F204F6FEBB5BAFA58BCC1C131EAC0&DivisionID=65&isArchived=0) 
at launches.

### Antennas ###

Almost any antenna that covers 435 Mhz can be used for receiving signals 
from TeleMetrum.

The best hand-held commercial directional antennas we've found for radio 
direction finding rockets are from 
[Arrow Antennas](http://www.arrowantennas.com/).  The 440-3 and 440-5 are 
both good choices for finding a TeleMetrum-equipped rocket when used with 
a suitable 70cm HT.  

The best home-made directional antennas for this purpose that we're aware of
are based on the ["cheap yagi"](http://www.wa5vjb.com/yagi-pdf/cheapyagi.pdf)
designs by Kent Britain WA5VJB.  Bdale makes his using lengths of pine
1x2, 1/8 inch brazing rod for the parasitic elements, and work-hardened 12 
gauge copper wire for the driven element.  The longer versions are great 
for roving in radio contests, and the 6-element 432 Mhz design works fine 
for chasing TeleMetrum-equipped rockets.  

