# Using Altus Metrum Products

## Where to Buy ##

All Altus Metrum products are available from the 
[Garbee and Garbee](https://shop.gag.com) web 
store.  [TeleMetrum](TeleMetrum/) starter kits are also available from 
[Apogee Components](http://www.apogeerockets.com/Altus_Metrum_GPS.asp)
and [Australian Rocketry](http://www.ausrocketry.com/shop/index.php?main_page=product_info&cPath=111&products_id=4302).

## Being Legal ##

In the US, you need an [amateur radio license](../Radio) or other 
authorization to legally operate the radio transmitters that are part
of our products.  Rules vary in other countries.

## In the Rocket ##

In the rocket itself, you just need a [TeleMetrum](../TeleMetrum) board and 
a LiPo rechargeable battery.  An 900mAh battery weighs less than a 9V 
alkaline battery, and will run a [TeleMetrum](../TeleMetrum) for hours.

[This document](InsertSheet.pdf) contains notes about how to install a 
flight computer such as TeleMetrum in a rocket.

By default, we ship TeleMetrum with a simple wire antenna.  If your 
electronics bay or the airframe it resides within is made of carbon fiber, 
which is nearly opaque to RF signals, you may choose to have an SMA connector 
installed so that you can run a coaxial cable to an antenna mounted 
elsewhere in the rocket.

## On the Ground ##

To receive the data stream from the rocket, you need an antenna and short 
feedline connected to one of our [TeleDongle](../TeleDongle) units.  The
TeleDongle in turn plugs directly into the USB port on a notebook 
computer.  Because TeleDongle looks like a simple serial port, your computer
does not require special device drivers... just plug it in.

All of our application software is written in Java, and supports Linux,
Windows, and MacOS systems equivalently.  See our [AltOS](/AltOS) page
for more details and to download a copy.

After the flight, you can use the RF link to extract the more detailed data 
logged in the rocket, or you can use a mini USB cable to plug into the 
TeleMetrum board directly.  Pulling out the data without having to open up
the rocket is pretty cool!  A USB cable is also how you charge the LiPo 
battery, so you'll want one of those anyway... the same cable used by lots 
of digital cameras and other modern electronic stuff will work fine.

If your rocket lands out of sight, you may enjoy having a hand-held GPS 
receiver, so that you can put in a waypoint for the last reported rocket 
position before touch-down.  This makes looking for your rocket a lot like 
Geo-Cacheing... just go to the waypoint and look around starting from there.

You may also enjoy having a ham radio "HT" that covers the 70cm band... you 
can use that with your antenna to direction-find the rocket on the ground 
the same way you can use a Walston or Beeline tracker.  This can be handy 
if the rocket is hiding in sage brush or a tree, or if the last GPS position 
doesn't get you close enough because the rocket dropped into a canyon, or 
the wind is blowing it across a dry lake bed, or something like that...  Keith
and Bdale both currently own and use the 
[Yaesu VX-6R](http://yaesu.com/indexVS.cfm?cmd=DisplayProducts&ProdCatID=111&encProdID=4C6F204F6FEBB5BAFA58BCC1C131EAC0&DivisionID=65&isArchived=0) 
at launches.

So, to recap, on the ground the hardware you'll need includes:

* an antenna and feedline
* a TeleDongle
* a notebook computer
* optionally, a handheld GPS receiver
* optionally, an HT or receiver covering 435 Mhz

The best hand-held commercial directional antennas we've found for radio 
direction finding rockets are from 
[Arrow Antennas](http://www.arrowantennas.com/).  The 440-3 and 440-5 are 
both good choices for finding a TeleMetrum-equipped rocket when used with 
a suitable 70cm HT.  

Find more information about antennas, HTs, and getting a ham radio license
on our [Radio](../Radio) page.

## Data Analysis ##

Our software makes it easy to log the data from each flight, both the 
telemetry received over the RF link during the flight itself, and the more
complete data log recorded in the DataFlash memory on the TeleMetrum 
board.  Once this data is on your computer, you can replay the flight in 
real time, get plots and summary information from your data, 
export a CSV file for further manipulation in your favorite spreadsheet, 
or export a KML file so that you can visualize the flight path in three
dimensions with [Google Earth](http://www.google.com/earth)!

Our ultimate goal is to emit a set of files for each flight that can be
published as a web page per flight, or just viewed on your local disk with 
a web browser.

## Future Plans ##

In the future, we intend to offer "companion boards" for the rocket that will
plug in to TeleMetrum to collect additional data, provide more pyro channels,
and so forth.  A reference design for a companion board will be documented
soon, and will be compatible with open source Arduino programming tools.

We are also working on the design of a hand-held ground terminal that will
allow monitoring the rocket's status, collecting data during flight, and
logging data after flight without the need for a notebook computer on the
flight line.  Particularly since it is so difficult to read most notebook
screens in direct sunlight, we think this will be a great thing to have.

We're also contemplating other altimeter designs with either more or less
features than TeleMetrum aimed at different needs within and beyond the rocket
community.  

Because all of our work is open, both the hardware designs and the software,
if you have some great idea for an addition to the current Altus Metrum family,
feel free to dive in and help!  Or let us know what you'd like to see that 
we aren't already working on, and maybe we'll get excited about it too... 
