[[!meta title="TeleLaunch"]]

# TeleLaunch — Multi-channel Wireless Launch Controller System #

TeleLaunch is secure radio-controlled rocket launch system capable of
operating up to 800 pads from a single controler.  A typical TeleLaunch 
system consists of one LCO board and one or more pyro boards.

TeleLaunch uses a two-way digital radio communications system for
positive indication of all operations. The communications link is
secured with AES CBC-MAC to prevent accidental or intentional
operation from unauthorized transmitters.

TeleLaunch operates in the 70cm amateur band at low power using 
Altus Metrum's proven modulation and coding schem to avoid interference 
with any rocketry electronics or other communication devices.

All boards in the TeleLaunch system are easily configured using USB for
parameters like operating frequency, callsign, cryptographic key, and
in the case of pyro boards the designated bank number.

## Launch Control Boards ##

All launch control boards in the TeleLaunch system are designed to use
a lithium polymer battery that can be recharged over USB.  They support 
distinct arm and fire switches, continuous indication of igniter 
continuity, and have super-bright LED indicators for remote arming, 
continuity, and RF link quality plus an audible indication of arming.  

### TeleLCO ###

TeleLCO controls up to 100 TeleFire banks, comes packaged in a rugged 
case, and is typically placed on a table for use by the designated LCO.

 * Large 1.36 inch LCD display for selected bank and pad

 * Rotary knob for pad selection

### TeleLCOTwo ###

A small LCO board capable of handling up to two TeleFireOne pyro 
boards, or one channel each on TeleFireEight boards.  TeleLCOTwo is ideal 
for individuals or clubs that have an existing launch control system but 
want to use TeleLaunch for an "away" launch cell.  

TeleLCOTwo is configured in advance by USB to know which two pyro channels 
it should interact with, and then a simple rocker switch selects between 
the two during use.

TeleLCOTwo comes packaged in a weather-sealed polycarbonate box with 
switches on one face, and BNC antenna connector and USB connectors.  It
can be placed on a table, but is typical hand-held during operation.

## Pyro Boards ##

Each pyro board in the TeleLaunch system uses FET technology for lowest 
possible resistance paths, allowing maximum current to be reliably 
delivered from the power source to the igniter leads. TeleFire boards can 
be powered by any 10-15V supply.  This would typically be a 12V lead acid 
battery, but 3-cell lithium polymer packs used in RC aircraft are also
suitable.

Each board features:

 * Continuity Detection. Igniter continuity uses a low-current sensing
   system which sends only 100µA through the igniter to prevent false
   ignition. The circuit also detects dead shorts.

 * Super-bright LEDs for continuity, arming and RF quality indicators.

 * Strobe and Siren. TeleFireFour has two 12V medium current (5A) outputs
   to drive a siren and strobe light when the launch system is armed
   and ready to fire.

 * Local arming switch. When in the safe position, power is completely
   disconnected from the igniter circuits to prevent any possibility
   of the LCO accidentally engaging firing circuits during rocket 
   preparations at the pad.

 * Each board is designed to fit in a standard Hammond weather-sealed
   polycarbonate enclosure with weather-sealed rocker switches for
   power and arming plus cable glands for DC input cable and igniter 
   output cables.  Alternatively, boards can be configured to mount
   in the user's choice of enclosure, such as a metal ammo box or 
   larger NEMA enclosure with space for the user's choice of 
   external connectors.

### TeleFireOne ###

TeleFireOne is a pyro board supporting a single igniter circuit.  This 
makes TeleFireOne idea for individuals, launch trailers, or for "away 
cells" at larger club launches.  

All high-current connections are made on the board using standard 
1/4-inch spade lugs, with screw terminals for the siren and strobe.  This 
allows for easy packaging and quick board swaps.

### TeleFireEight ###

TeleFireEight has eight igniter circuits, making it ideal for use at
club launches.  Larger clubs or launch site setups can use multiple
boards to organize the site into multiple banks with up to 8 rockets
each.

All connections are made on the board using 1/4-in spade lugs for
eash packaging and quick board swaps.

## Documentation ##

Not written yet.

## Software ##

TeleLaunch firmware is part of the larger [AltOS](/AltOS) suite of 
software.

## Availability ##

Several prototype systems have been built and successfully 
deployed.  Lessons learned from use of those systems are currently
being incorporated into new board revisions, and general availability
of the system for sale is expected in the first half of 2018.

## Licenses ##

TeleLaunch hardware is licensed under the [TAPR](http://www.tapr.org) 
[Open Hardware License](http://www.tapr.org/ohl.html)

TeleLaunch software is licensed 
[GPL version 2](http://www.gnu.org/licenses/old-licenses/gpl-2.0.html)

